Illustrations are powerful teaching tools.
They help to explain complex ideas.
They also stimulate thinking
and can break down prejudice.
Illustrations stir emotions
and appeal to the heart.
They’re also memory aids.
It’s no wonder, then,
that Jesus made good use of them.
Here are three things
that will make your illustrations effective:
Select simple illustrations,
choose them with your listeners in mind,
and use them to teach the points
that are truly important.
Listen to the following illustration,
and see if it’s effective.
“Furthermore,
the world is passing away and so is its desire,
but the one
who does the will of God remains forever.”
If the world is passing away
and life in this system of things is temporary,
shouldn’t that affect
how we use our time and energy?
For example, imagine you’re going
on a seven-day, European cruise.
The ports of call are Lisbon, Gibraltar,
Barcelona, Monte Carlo, Florence, and Rome.
Because the ship will have many activities,
you’ve chosen an inside cabin.
Although the room is nicely decorated,
it’s not exactly your taste.
For example, you don’t like
the brightly colored carpet and walls
that are common on many cruise ships.
Also, the bedspread and curtains
are not what you would’ve chosen.
You have a refrigerator in the room, but it’s small.
Would you spend time redecorating the room
—maybe put down a new carpet,
paint the room a different color,
hang new curtains,
or purchase a larger refrigerator?
Of course not!
Your stay is only temporary.
Similarly,
our stay in this system of things is only temporary.
Does it make sense
that we would spend time and energy
to make our life as comfortable as possible?
Although this illustration made a good point,
was it as effective as it could have been?
Was it simple?
Well, was it necessary for the audience
to know the reason for the trip,
how long the cruise was,
or the cities where the ship was stopping?
No.
These details
actually complicated the illustration.
Here’s something else:
Did the speaker have his listeners in mind?
Probably few
in his audience have taken a cruise,
so it would be hard
for them to identify with the situation.
Therefore,
the point of the illustration could be lost,
or their minds
might be diverted to the speaker
rather than his message.
How might the speaker have illustrated
the same point more effectively?
Let’s watch him try again.
“Furthermore,
the world is passing away and so is its desire,
but the one
who does the will of God remains forever.”
If the world is passing away
and our life in this system of things is temporary,
shouldn’t that affect
how we use our time and energy?
For example,
imagine that you’re visiting relatives
in another village for a few days.
They kindly give you a room.
However,
the bed is not as comfortable as yours.
The walls could use a few more pictures,
and there’s no window.
Would you purchase a larger bed for your stay
and some pictures for the walls?
Or would you take time to install a window?
Of course not!
You’re only staying a few days.
We might relocate
the chairs and tables and a few simple things
to make our surroundings
more comfortable during our temporary stay,
but we would not go to great effort or expense
to redecorate the entire room.
In like manner,
we keep matters simple during
our temporary residency in this old system,
giving our main focus to Kingdom interests.
Jesus’ illustrations were simple.
For example:
“The Kingdom of the heavens
is like leaven that a woman took
“and mixed with three large measures of flour
until the whole mass was fermented.”
It’s just one sentence about baking bread,
a situation familiar to his audience.
This simplicity
made Jesus’ illustrations appeal to the heart.
Jesus also used illustrations
to teach main points, not minor details.
So use illustrations selectively.
If you were to use an illustration
to teach a minor detail,
your audience may remember the illustration
but not the point of instruction.
How can you find appropriate illustrations?
Be observant.
Look at the world around you,
study our Christian publications,
and listen to skilled teachers.
Some experienced teachers
save illustrations in a file to use later.
If you want to teach like Jesus,
enhance your teaching with simple
illustrations that appeal to your listeners
and that teach main points.